[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Is it possible that your
brain has been conditioned
and habituated by you to view
your outer reality in a very
limited way?
When you focus your
attention on a daily basis
in this three-dimensional
reality,
your brain naturally narrows its
focus on everything material.
As you learned in
the last episode,
this is called a
conversion focus.
And it's the hormones of stress
that amplify this process.
Is it possible
there are other ways
to focus your attention
to break the habit of how
you see the world?
And can you make your brain
begin to work differently?
I'm your host, Dr. Joe Dispenza,
and in the previous episode,
we went into great
detail on the difference
between survival and creation.
In this episode, we're going to
identify in a very simple way
the different types of
brainwaves to show you
the skill of being able
to consciously control
your own brainwaves.
[THEME MUSIC]
Let's start by understanding the
different types of brainwaves.
When neurons fire
in your brain, they
emit electromagnetic
frequencies.
And science has been able
to capture those frequencies
by using a technology called
electroencephalographic
readings, or EEG readings.
We put on a cap on
a person's head,
and there's these
little electrodes.
And we use a gel that
begins to couple the surface
of that electrode to the scalp.
And we hook up those
electrodes to a computer
that begins to measure
the different frequencies
in different compartments in
different regions in the brain.
So then, let's talk about
the different brainwaves.
The first type of brainwave
is called beta brainwaves.
Think about your
brain as an organ
that begins to create
meaning and coherence
and order between what's
going on in your outer world
and what's going on
in your inner world.
Now, when you're
conscious and you're awake
and your attention is on
your outer environment
and you're aware of your
body in space and time,
your brain has to
gather and begin
to integrate all the different
information through those five
different sensory pathways.
Everything you're
listening to and hearing,
everything you're seeing,
everything you're feeling,
everything you're smelling--
all of that information
has to be integrated
by the brain.
And when the brain is active
and conscious and you're aware,
your brainwaves go into what's
called beta brainwave patterns.
Now, think about beta brainwave
patterns as your attention
primarily on your
outer environment.
So then, we've talked
about the principle
of meditation and beginning
to regulate and change
your brainwaves.
So is it possible,
then, that you
can begin to change your
brainwaves from beta brainwaves
to alpha brainwaves?
Well, back in the
'60s and the '70s
when there was a lot of
research done on biofeedback,
there were researchers at
Princeton University that
spent an enormous
amount of time trying
to change their brainwaves.
And over and over
again they were
unable to change their
brainwave patterns no matter
what they did.
Whether they chanted, whether
they had positive affirmations,
whether they burnt
incense, they did
all of these different types
of things, relaxing their body,
nothing actually changed
their brainwaves,
until one researcher was
so tired that he finally
said, I give up.
And the moment he surrendered
and he let go and he gave up,
he watched his brain
right before his eyes move
from beta brainwave patterns
to alpha brainwave patterns.
Think of alpha when your inner
world starts becoming more real
than your outer world.
Now most people, when they're
functioning in beta brainwave
patterns, they naturally shift
to alpha brainwave patterns.
The brain pauses for
a moment, and you
begin to think about what
you're thinking about.
And in fact, when I do
lectures around the world
and I'm watching people pay
attention, they're relaxed,
their attention is on
their outer environment,
they're exposed
to the information
that I'm teaching them, then
all of a sudden they stop
and they pause and
then go like this.
And when they stop and
they pause, all of a sudden
they're making their inner world
more real than the outer world,
and they freeze that
image in the brain,
and the brain begins to
consolidate it neurologically.
So when you get into
the meditative process
and you sit your body
down and it's not eating,
it's not smelling, it's not
tasting, it's not feeling,
it's not experiencing, you're
not seeing, you're not hearing,
of course now you're
starting to disconnect
from your outer environment.
And now your inner world
starts becoming more real
than your outer world.
And in that state, brainwaves
in your thinking brain
begin to slow down.
And when that occurs, you move
into alpha brainwave patterns.
And alpha brainwave patterns
are slower brainwave patterns.
Now, what's the
significance of this?
When you begin to move
into alpha from beta,
you're beginning to move
beyond your analytical mind.
And now you're entering
the operating system
where all those subconscious
programs, habits, and behaviors
exist.
So then in alpha, we
tend to no longer hear
the voice in our head
that's talking to us,
and all of a sudden we start
to see in pictures and images.
Think of alpha as
the imaginary state.
Another way to think of alpha
is when you're driving down
the freeway in your car.
Your brain is fixed
in a state of trance.
You're in that state of alpha.
You have no idea how
long you've been driving,
you have no idea who's
been driving the car,
you have no attention on
anything in your outer world.
You're imaging
pictures in your mind,
and you have to move in the
alpha in order to do that.
There's another brainwave state
called theta brainwave state.
This is a hypnotic state.
This is a state of
heightened suggestibility.
Suggestibility is your
ability to accept, believe,
and surrender to information
without any analysis.
So in theta, it's a very
slow brainwave state.
And in a sense, the body
is resting and semi-asleep,
and you're awake.
Or better said, you are
conscious in your subconscious
mind.
When a person moves into
theta, lights are out.
And the part of the
brain that connects you
to everything known or
familiar in your life--
the seat of the identity,
the conscious mind,
the personality-- now
has been suppressed.
And now consciousness
or awareness
is moving out of the
neocortex, and it's
beginning to move
into the subconscious
centers of the brain.
Now, the next state is called
delta brainwave states.
And in delta, think about
delta as restorative sleep.
This is when your body
is in a catatonic state,
and it's completely asleep.
And now there's
very little activity
in your conscious mind.
The last state is called
gamma brainwave patterns.
Now, you would
think that gamma is
a faster frequency than beta.
And in a sense, it is.
But now, when you live by
the hormones of stress,
the arousal of those
stress hormones
drives the brain not into
just a normal beta state
but a high beta state.
And if you look at gamma,
there is an arousal that's
taking place in the brain.
But the arousal is not coming
from some danger, some threat,
or some condition in your
outer environment that's
evoking the stress hormones
and causing emotions
like aggression or fear
or sadness to occur.
In gamma, there is an
arousal within the body.
Energy from the body begins
to move up into the brain.
And when that happens,
the brain moves
into a super-conscious
or super-aware state.
So think about gamma as a
super-aroused, super-conscious,
super-aware state, where
your inner world tends
to become more real
than your outer world.
I want you to just
see the difference
between high beta brainwave
patterns and gamma brainwave
patterns.
You can see that
the waves of gamma
tend to be more compressed,
and the frequency
tends to be a little bit faster.
Now, look at the left-hand
side of this graph.
You see the numbers going
from 0 all the way up to 100.
So delta brainwaves tend
to be at a frequency that's
very slow in the neocortex--
0.5 to 4 cycles per second.
Theta brainwaves tend to
be a little bit faster.
They're 4 to 8
cycles per second,
and as we keep
increasing frequencies,
you can see that alpha
brainwave patterns are about 8
to 13 cycles per second.
Now, in low-level
beta, you can see
low level beta is about 13
to 15 cycles per second.
Mid-range beta is about 16
to 22 cycles per second.
Now, let's talk about this
before we go any further.
Low-level beta is a
healthy brainwave state.
In fact, when
you're learning, you
should be in low-level beta.
Why?
Because there's no
threat, there's no danger,
it's the perfect time to learn.
But if a professor
came out while you
were learning and
said, there's going
to be a quiz at the end
of this teaching session
and you have to pass the
quiz in order for you
to pass the course, all
of a sudden the light bulb
in your brain would get
a little bit brighter,
and it would put
more energy in there,
and you would get more
awake or more aroused.
When you're getting
ready to do a lecture
or getting ready to do a
speech, this kind of stress,
called eustress or
good stress, gives you
a little bit more energy
to be able to navigate
in your three-dimensional
reality,
and the brain begins to
perk up a little bit.
Now, take a look
at high-level beta.
It's 22 to 50 cycles per second.
And high-level beta is more
than two to three times
higher than low-level beta.
And in high-level beta,
this is when your brain
is stuck in emergency mode.
And think about high beta
like driving your sports car
on the freeway in first gear.
It's good for the short
term, but once a person
gets stuck in this
high beta state,
now they're living in severe
anxiety, severe depression.
They're in a state where
their brain is always aroused,
and they need something
outside of them
to begin to sedate the body
so they can begin to relax.
And this is a problem
because living in high beta
is the arousal of
the stress hormones.
And as we begin to shift
our attention from one
person to another person to
another thing to another place
to another time, the
arousal of the brain because
of those stress hormones moving
into a very high beta state
not only causes the
high beta to happen,
but it causes the brain to begin
to function very incoherently.
And people tend to narrow
their focus on the danger.
And now they're enslaved to
the laws of Newtonian physics,
where they have to
rush to try to get
things to happen in their life.
And for a lot of people, their
brains are stuck in high beta.
Now, take a look at
gamma brainwave patterns.
You can see low gamma cycles
are between 25 to 50 cycles
per second, and high
gamma brainwave patterns,
they can go from 50 to
100 cycles per second.
And this is an arousal that's
taking place in the brain,
and the arousal is
producing emotions
like ecstasy, bliss, euphoria.
It's a whole different
type of arousal.
So then, if the
purpose of meditation
is to get beyond
your analytical mind
and what separates
your conscious mind
from your subconscious mind is
your analytical mind, in order
for you to get beyond
your analytical mind
and enter the subconscious mind
where those automatic programs
exist, you're going to have
to learn a formula or a way
to begin to slow
your brainwaves down
from high-level beta
to mid-range beta
to low-level beta.
And when you start slowing down
into alpha brainwave patterns,
you've crossed past
the analytical mind.
And now, as you begin to slow
your brainwaves down even
further, you're in the
subconscious part of the brain.
Now you can begin to make some
significant measurable changes.
So then, let's review this.
We go from beta to
alpha to theta to delta.
And think about
beta and alpha being
the seat of your conscious mind,
and alpha, theta, and delta
representing your
subconscious mind.
And as you begin to slow down
brain activity because you're
no longer analyzing and
thinking with your neocortex,
then consciousness or
your awareness or energy
naturally flows right
out of the neocortex
right into your
limbic brain, the seat
of your autonomic
nervous system.
That's the part of
your brain, remember,
that begins to
control and regulate
all those automatic
bodily functions.
In a sense, it's the
part of the brain that's
giving you life, that has
an agenda, to keep you
in balance, to keep
you in homeostasis,
and it's very automatic.
So now you're in the
very operating system
where you can begin to program
your autonomic nervous system
to change its hormones, to
begin to change the body's
function in some way.
And in a sense, you are
conscious in your subconscious
mind.
Brain scans have
shown that students
that know how to regulate and
slow down their brainwaves,
they move into that
low-level alpha and theta,
and all of a sudden
they start to merge
with their autonomic
nervous system.
And we call this
getting beyond the self.
And when the conscious mind is
merging with the subconscious
mind or you're
beginning to connect
to your autonomic
nervous system,
its job is to create
order and balance.
And when you get
beyond yourself,
get beyond everything known in
your three-dimensional reality,
something magical happens.
When the autonomic nervous
system begins to connect
and you're not activating
those circuits,
you're not thinking and
feeling in the same cycles,
all of a sudden it begins to
organize or create coherence
in the neocortex, which has
been fractured and subdivided
because of the
hormones of stress.
So now, think about coherence
as order, as cadence, as rhythm.
Things are working synchronized
in an organized way.
Think of incoherence
like a group of drummers
with no rhythm banging on
the drums at the same time.
And the brain as well
as the heart that
are influenced by the
hormones of stress,
as they begin to function
in a very disorganized way,
that incoherence is a very
weak signal for the body.
Think about it like this.
If you went to a football
game and something happened
favorable to the home
team and everybody
was clapping at the same
time and applauding,
that would be
incoherence in the brain.
Now, normal coherence
in the brain
would be like every 10th
person in the stadium clapping
in rhythm, and that's normal or
average for most human beings.
But when the brain and
heart get highly organized,
highly integrated,
highly synchronized,
imagine everybody in
the stadium clapping
at the same time in rhythm.
Not only does it create
order and coherence,
but it also increases
the amount of energy
in the brain and heart.
And when there's more
energy in the brain,
there's more energy
in the heart,
there's a greater level of
awareness about your body,
your environment, and time.
I want to show you the
difference between coherence
and incoherence.
On the left image,
where it says coherence,
you're looking at the
top of their head.
Now, 19 different
compartments of the brain
that are connected
through electrodes,
and if all of those
compartments are synchronized,
you'll see the valleys and
the peaks all lined up,
and we'll call that
order or coherence.
If different parts of the brain
are lagging or behind or out
of order, then you'll
see all of a sudden,
some of those valleys lining
up with some of the peaks
and different
compartments of the brain
are not communicating
well with each other,
and we call that incoherence.
When we see a lot of blue when
we're measuring coherence,
that means it has a low level
of coherence in the brain.
If you don't see any blue and
you see pink, that's normal.
And normal means average, what
the average person experiences
in terms of coherence.
The red represents a high
amount of order in the brain.
And red means there's a
super level of coherence.
So now, this is a
normal brain scan.
This is what we
call a strip chart.
And we're measuring the 19
different parts of the brain.
That brainwave pattern is
low-level beta brainwave
patterns.
Now, the person's sitting
there, their eyes are open,
they're being their normal self.
We ask them to close their eyes,
begin to open their awareness,
begin to open their focus
from a convergent focus
to a divergent focus
or a broad focus,
and in a matter of seconds,
this is what we see.
Now, remember, coherence
is orderliness.
And look how those waves
are organized and stacked
equally on top of each other.
The brain is highly
synchronized,
or phase synchronized in
alpha brainwave states.
Here's another one.
Another person goes from a
narrow focus to a broad focus,
and you can see the
entire brain is coherently
in alpha brainwave state.
Here's another person
who has global coherence.
They go from a narrow
focus to a broad focus,
from a convergent focus
to a divergent focus,
and you can see all of
those different brainwaves
beautifully stacked
on top of each other.
And we can say that the
brain is highly integrated.
If you look at that arrow on
the right side of the screen,
you can see that all of
those peaks are lining up.
That means the entire brain
is in an alpha coherent state.
In this slide,
you're seeing someone
in phase synchronized coherent
theta brainwave patterns.
The entire brain is
synchronized into theta,
and they're in that
hypnotic state,
they're in that
suggestible state
where the lights are out
in the thinking neocortex.
And when they slip into
that theta brainwave state,
we can say that they're
completely beyond themselves,
and they've dissociated
from everything
known in their
three-dimensional reality.
Our research, as well as
other researchers at Princeton
University and around
the world, have
found that if you can
broaden your focus,
as you begin to
open your awareness,
the act of taking your attention
off of everything material
and putting your attention
on nothing but space,
if reality is both a
particle and a wave,
if it's matter and energy--
and there's an invisible field
of energy called the quantum
field that exists beyond
this space and time
that you can't experience
with your senses
but can only experience
with your awareness--
and that unified field,
that invisible field
of frequency, that it is
that very frequency that
connects everything material and
organizes everything into form.
So then when you
broaden your focus
and you take your
attention off of matter,
you're putting your attention on
that invisible field of energy,
whose signature is oneness,
whose signature is order,
whose signature is greater and
greater levels of wholeness.
The person is feeling so
whole, so in love with life,
that it's impossible
for them to want.
I mean, how can you want
when you feel whole?
You feel like you
have everything.
And so we've measured
this on people.
In fact, we can actually
predict when it's
going to happen to a person.
We start seeing more and
more order taking place
in the brain, and all
of a sudden we can say,
after a certain
point, this person
is going to have a very
transcendental moment.
And when we see those two
hemispheres coming together,
when that person is connecting
and they feel whole,
energy moves right
into their heart.
And their heart starts
beating very orderly and very
coherently.
The heart begins to produce
an ambient magnetic field.
Now the field and the
energy is beginning
to broaden from the body,
and that energy is frequency.
And that frequency
carries information.
And now the person feels
connected to something greater.
And you can walk around
and look at that person,
and you can see tears
of joy rolling down
their face because they feel
so whole, they feel so in love
with life that they feel
connected to something greater,
that I call that the
natural state of being.
So what does it mean, then,
to get beyond the self?
If we're getting beyond
the analytical mind
and cooling off brain activity
that's associated to everything
familiar in our life, that
means, then, in order for you
to get beyond
yourself, you're going
to have to take your attention
off of everything material
and known in this
three-dimensional reality.
And our research
shows that when you
go from a somebody to a nobody,
from putting your attention
on some things to putting your
attention on nothing, putting
your attention from
somewhere to nowhere,
when you're putting your
attention from some time
into no time, that
is the moment you're
disconnecting from this
three-dimensional reality.
And in a sense, we call that
"getting beyond the self."
And now, at this
elegant moment, you
are in the sweet spot of
the generous present moment.
And we can say now you're
at that perfect place
in the eternal now for
you to begin to create
something new from the unknown.
Why?
Because if you have no attention
on the predictable future
or the familiar past, if you
have no attention on anything
material in your
outer environment,
on no one or nothing
or nowhere, and you've
gotten beyond your body,
which has been conditioned
to be the mind, the only thing
that you are in that moment
is pure consciousness.
And when you're pure
consciousness dissociated
from everything
material in your life,
now you're at the perfect
place to create something new.
Now that I've shown you
that there's a formula
and how you can create a
more coherent, integrated,
synchronized
brainwave state, I'd
like to show you that this
process can affect your ability
to reprogram and change
your own genetic destiny.
In the next episode, we're going
to explore how you can become
your own genetic engineer.
I'm Dr. Joe Dispenza
for "Rewired,"
and I hope to see you in
the next episode, where
we go beyond the ordinary
into the extraordinary.